.TH "PQlocalTZInfo" 3 2011 "libpqtypes" "libpqtypes Manual"
.SH NAME
PQlocalTZInfo \- Gets the local machine\'s timezone information.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
\fB#include <libpqtypes.h>
.br
.sp
void PQlocalTZInfo(time_t *\fIt\fP, int *\fIgmtoff\fP, int *\fIisdst\fP, char **\fItzabbrp\fP);
\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
This function retrieves the local machine\'s timezone information.

If the \fIt\fP argument is not NULL, it represents a time_t value to get timezone
information for.  If it is NULL, the current time is used.

The \fIgmtoff\fP argument will be pointed at the number of seconds from GMT,
same value as the GNU (struct tm).tm_gmtoff extension.

The \fIisdst\fP argument will be pointed at zero if in standard time, one if in
daylight savings time and negative one if unknown.

The \fItzabbrp\fP argument will be pointed at the timezone abbreviation, like
PST, ADT, EST, etc..
.SH RETURN VALUE
.LP
None.
.SH EXAMPLES
.LP
This example gets the local timezone information for a file\'s modified time.
.LP
.RS
.nf
\fBint gmtoff;
int isdst;
char *tzabbr;
struct stat st;

stat("report.xml", &st);
PQlocalTZInfo(&st.st_mtime, &gmtoff, &isdst, &tzabbr);
\fP
.fi
.RE
.SH RATIONALE
.LP
libpqtypes needs the ability to get the local machine\'s timezone information for the
datetime data types.  It later became apparent that a portable way of getting timezone
information was very useful and in demand.  Thus, this function was made public.
.SH AUTHOR
.LP
A contribution of eSilo, LLC. for the PostgreSQL Database Management System.
Written by Andrew Chernow and Merlin Moncure.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
.LP
Report bugs to <libpqtypes@esilo.com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
.LP
Copyright (c) 2011 eSilo, LLC. All rights reserved.
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.
There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or  FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH SEE ALSO
.LP
\fIpqt-specs(3)\fP
